research.md, before:

--- 
layout: default
title: Rylee Lyman | Research
math: true
---
# Research 

[Here is my CV][CV].

## Publications and Preprints

- **Doubly-Uniform Exponential Growth for Free-By-Cyclic Groups**  
(with [Robert Kropholler](http://www.robertkropholler.com) and [Thomas Ng](https://sites.google.com/site/thomasng192/))  
*In preparation.*

- **Train Tracks on Graphs of Groups and Outer Automorphisms of Hyperbolic Groups**  
*PhD thesis*. Available at: [arXiv:2005.00164](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.00164)  
Abstract:  
> Stallings remarked that an outer automorphism of a free group
> may be thought of as a subdivision of a graph followed by a sequence of folds.
> In this thesis, we prove that automorphisms of fundamental groups of graphs of groups
> satisfying this condition may be represented by irreducible train track maps
> in the sense of Bestvina–Handel (we allow collapsing invariant subgraphs).
> Of course, we construct relative train track maps as well.
> Along the way, we give a new exposition of the Bass–Serre theory of groups acting on trees,
> morphisms of graphs of groups, and foldings thereof.
> We produce normal forms for automorphisms of free products and extend an argument
> of Qing–Rafi to show that they are not quasi-geodesic.
> As an application, we answer affirmatively a question of Paulin:
> outer automorphisms of finitely generated word hyperbolic groups
> satisfy a dynamical trichotomy generalizing the Nielsen–Thurston
> "periodic, reducible of pseudo-Anosov." At the end of the thesis
> we collect some open problems we find interesting.

- **Nielsen realization for infinite-type surfaces**  
(with [Santana Afton](http://people.math.gatech.edu/~safton3/), 
[Danny Calegari](http://math.uchicago.edu/~dannyc/) and [Lvzhou Chen](http://math.uchicago.edu/~lzchen/))  
*Submitted.* Available at: [arXiv:2002.09760](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.09760)  
Abstract for version 3 (which is available [here][Nielsen]):  
> Given a subgroup $$G$$ of the mapping class group of a surface $$S$$,
> the Nielsen realization problem asks whether $$G$$ can be realized
> as a finite group of homeomorphisms of $$S$$. In 1983, Kerckhoff
> showed that for $$S$$ a finite-type surface, any finite subgroup $$G$$
> may be realized as a group of isometries of some hyperbolic metric on $$S$$.
> We extend Kerckhoff's result to orientable, infinite-type surfaces.
> As applications, we classify torsion elements in the mapping class group
> of the plane minus a Cantor set, and also show that topological groups
> containing sequences of torsion elements limiting to the identity do not
> embed continuously into the mapping class group of $$S$$. Finally,
> we show that compact subgroups of the mapping class group of $$S$$ are finite,
> and locally compact subgroups are discrete.

- **Train Tracks, Orbigraphs and CAT(0) Free-By-Cyclic Groups**  
*Awaiting revision.* Available at: [arXiv:1909.03097][traintracksorbigraphs]  
Abstract:  
> Gersten gave an example of a polynomially-growing automorphism of $$F_3$$
> whose mapping torus $$F_3\rtimes\mathbb{Z}$$ cannot act properly by semi-simple
> isometries on a CAT(0) metric space. By contrast, we show that if $$\Phi$$
> is a polynomially-growing automorphism belonging to one of several related groups,
> then there exists $$k>0$$ such that the mapping torus of $$\Phi^k$$ acts
> properly and cocompactly on a CAT(0) metric space.
> This $k$ can often be bounded uniformly.
> Our results apply to automorphisms of a free product of $$n$$ copies of a finite group $$A$$,
> as well as to palindromic and symmetric automorphisms of a free group of finite rank.
> Of independent interest, a key tool in our proof is the construction of relative train track maps
> on orbigraphs, certain graphs of groups thought of as orbi-spaces.

## Other Manuscripts

[Here are slides][Thesis Slides] made in Notability for my thesis defense,
titled Train Tracks and Outer Automorphisms of Hyperbolic Groups.

[Here are slides][Braid Slides] from a lightning talk titled 
**Recognizing Pseudo-Anosov Braids in Out($$W_n$$).**

[Here are slides][Free By Z Slides] from a recent talk titled
**Train Tracks, Orbigraphs and CAT(0) Free-by-cyclic Groups.**

[Thesis Slides]: {{ "assets/pdfs/Thesis Defense.pdf" | relative_url }}
[Free By Z Slides]: {{ "assets/pdfs/freebyz.pdf" | relative_url }}
[Braid Slides]: {{ "assets/pdfs/PseudoAnosovBraid.pdf" | relative_url }}
[CV]: {{ "assets/pdfs/Lyman.pdf" | relative_url }}
[Nielsen]: {{ "assets/pdfs/Nielsen_v3b.pdf" | relative_url }}
[traintracksorbigraphs]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.03097

Commit message:

add GGTWB notes to Research page

research.md, after:

--- 
layout: default
title: Rylee Lyman | Research
math: true
---
# Research 

[Here is my CV][CV].

## Geometric Group Theory without Boundaries

Along with Macarena Arenas, Sami Douba and Abdul Zalloum,
I am organizing a virtual "summer school" that will run the last two weeks of July.
More info is available on the [summer school website](https://sites.google.com/view/ggtwb/home?authuser=0).

I am giving three lectures in this summer school on Bass and Serre's theory 
of graphs of groups and groups acting on trees.

Here are notes for the first lecture in [PDF][Lecture1PDF] and [Notability][Lecture1Note] formats.

[Lecture1PDF]: {{ "assets/pdfs/GGTWB1.pdf" | relative_url }}
[Lecture1Note]: {{ "assets/pdfs/GGTWB1.note" | relative_url }}

## Publications and Preprints

- **Doubly-Uniform Exponential Growth for Free-By-Cyclic Groups**  
(with [Robert Kropholler](http://www.robertkropholler.com) and [Thomas Ng](https://sites.google.com/site/thomasng192/))  
*In preparation.*

- **Train Tracks on Graphs of Groups and Outer Automorphisms of Hyperbolic Groups**  
*PhD thesis*. Available at: [arXiv:2005.00164](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.00164)  
Abstract:  
> Stallings remarked that an outer automorphism of a free group
> may be thought of as a subdivision of a graph followed by a sequence of folds.
> In this thesis, we prove that automorphisms of fundamental groups of graphs of groups
> satisfying this condition may be represented by irreducible train track maps
> in the sense of Bestvina–Handel (we allow collapsing invariant subgraphs).
> Of course, we construct relative train track maps as well.
> Along the way, we give a new exposition of the Bass–Serre theory of groups acting on trees,
> morphisms of graphs of groups, and foldings thereof.
> We produce normal forms for automorphisms of free products and extend an argument
> of Qing–Rafi to show that they are not quasi-geodesic.
> As an application, we answer affirmatively a question of Paulin:
> outer automorphisms of finitely generated word hyperbolic groups
> satisfy a dynamical trichotomy generalizing the Nielsen–Thurston
> "periodic, reducible of pseudo-Anosov." At the end of the thesis
> we collect some open problems we find interesting.

- **Nielsen realization for infinite-type surfaces**  
(with [Santana Afton](http://people.math.gatech.edu/~safton3/), 
[Danny Calegari](http://math.uchicago.edu/~dannyc/) and [Lvzhou Chen](http://math.uchicago.edu/~lzchen/))  
*Submitted.* Available at: [arXiv:2002.09760](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.09760)  
Abstract for version 3 (which is available [here][Nielsen]):  
> Given a subgroup $$G$$ of the mapping class group of a surface $$S$$,
> the Nielsen realization problem asks whether $$G$$ can be realized
> as a finite group of homeomorphisms of $$S$$. In 1983, Kerckhoff
> showed that for $$S$$ a finite-type surface, any finite subgroup $$G$$
> may be realized as a group of isometries of some hyperbolic metric on $$S$$.
> We extend Kerckhoff's result to orientable, infinite-type surfaces.
> As applications, we classify torsion elements in the mapping class group
> of the plane minus a Cantor set, and also show that topological groups
> containing sequences of torsion elements limiting to the identity do not
> embed continuously into the mapping class group of $$S$$. Finally,
> we show that compact subgroups of the mapping class group of $$S$$ are finite,
> and locally compact subgroups are discrete.

- **Train Tracks, Orbigraphs and CAT(0) Free-By-Cyclic Groups**  
*Awaiting revision.* Available at: [arXiv:1909.03097][traintracksorbigraphs]  
Abstract:  
> Gersten gave an example of a polynomially-growing automorphism of $$F_3$$
> whose mapping torus $$F_3\rtimes\mathbb{Z}$$ cannot act properly by semi-simple
> isometries on a CAT(0) metric space. By contrast, we show that if $$\Phi$$
> is a polynomially-growing automorphism belonging to one of several related groups,
> then there exists $$k>0$$ such that the mapping torus of $$\Phi^k$$ acts
> properly and cocompactly on a CAT(0) metric space.
> This $k$ can often be bounded uniformly.
> Our results apply to automorphisms of a free product of $$n$$ copies of a finite group $$A$$,
> as well as to palindromic and symmetric automorphisms of a free group of finite rank.
> Of independent interest, a key tool in our proof is the construction of relative train track maps
> on orbigraphs, certain graphs of groups thought of as orbi-spaces.

## Other Manuscripts

[Here are slides][Thesis Slides] made in Notability for my thesis defense,
titled Train Tracks and Outer Automorphisms of Hyperbolic Groups.

[Here are slides][Braid Slides] from a lightning talk titled 
**Recognizing Pseudo-Anosov Braids in Out($$W_n$$).**

[Here are slides][Free By Z Slides] from a recent talk titled
**Train Tracks, Orbigraphs and CAT(0) Free-by-cyclic Groups.**

[Thesis Slides]: {{ "assets/pdfs/Thesis Defense.pdf" | relative_url }}
[Free By Z Slides]: {{ "assets/pdfs/freebyz.pdf" | relative_url }}
[Braid Slides]: {{ "assets/pdfs/PseudoAnosovBraid.pdf" | relative_url }}
[CV]: {{ "assets/pdfs/Lyman.pdf" | relative_url }}
[Nielsen]: {{ "assets/pdfs/Nielsen_v3b.pdf" | relative_url }}
[traintracksorbigraphs]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.03097
