---
layout: post
math: true
---
I realized I haven't, to my knowledge, talked about adjoint functors yet!
Let's do that now,
and introduce *compactly generated* topological spaces in the process.

## Adjoint functors

A pair of functors $$F\colon \mathsf{C} \to \mathsf{D}$$ and $$G\colon \mathsf{D} \to \mathsf{C}$$ 
are an *adjoint pair,*
or more accurately, $$F$$ is *left adjoint* to $$G$$
and $$G$$ is *right adjoint* to $$F$$, written $$F \dashv G$$,
if there is an isomorphism

$$ \mathsf{D}(Fc,d) \cong \mathsf{C}(c,Gd)$$

natural in $$c$$ and $$d$$.

For example, let $$\mathsf{C}$$ be the category of sets $$\mathsf{Set}$$
and $$\mathsf{D}$$ the category of groups $$\mathsf{Grp}$$.
Since every group is in particular a set,
and every homomorphism in particular a function,
we have a functor $$U\colon \mathsf{Grp} \to \mathsf{Set}$$.
On the other side we have a functor $$F\colon \mathsf{Set} \to \mathsf{Grp}$$
that sends a set $$X$$ to the free group on that set $$F(X)$$.
The claimed isomorphism 

$$ \mathsf{Grp}(FX,G) \cong \mathsf{Set}(X,UG)$$

says that homomorphisms from the free group on a set $$X$$ to a group $$G$$
are in one-to-one correspondence with set maps from $$X$$ to the set $$G$$.
This is the universal property of the free group!
I can imagine it being a good idea to trace out what naturality is asserting here;
you should try it.

Another example is $$\iota \dashv (\cdot)^{\operatorname{ab}}$$,
where $$\iota\colon \mathsf{Ab} \to \mathsf{Grp}$$ is the inclusion
of the category of abelian groups into the category of groups
and $$(\cdot)^{\operatorname{ab}}\colon \mathsf{Grp} \to \mathsf{Ab}$$
sends a group to its *abelianization.*
Here the claimed isomorphism

$$\mathsf{Ab}(G^{\operatorname{ab}},A) \cong \mathsf{Grp}(G,\iota A)$$

says that homomorphisms from the abelianization of $$G$$ to an abelian group $$A$$
are in one-to-one correspondence with homomorphisms from $$G$$ to $$A$$.

It can be particularly illuminating to plug the same object 
into one side of the equation and see what happens to the identity on the other side.
A silly example is if we let $$G = \iota A$$.
On the lefthand side of the equation we have for every abelian group $$A$$
a special homomorphism $$\epsilon_A \colon (\iota A)^{\operatorname{ab}} \to A$$;
this turns out to be the isomorphism identifying the abelianization of an abelian group $$A$$ with itself.
This homomorphism, if you trace it out,
turns out to be natural in $$A$$; we call it the *counit* of the adjunction.
A less silly example is if we let $$A = G^{\operatorname{ab}}$$.
Then on the righthand side of the equation we have for every group $$G$$
a special homomorphism $$\eta_G \colon G \to \iota(G^{\operatorname{ab}})$$.
This is the homomorphism from $$G$$ to its abelianization;
it turns out to be natural in $$G$$ and we call it the *unit* of the adjunction.

For our free group example, the unit sends a set $$X$$ to its image inside $$FX$$
and the counit is the map from the free group on the underlying set of a group $$G$$
to the group $$G$$ that takes a word generated by elements of the group $$G$$ and evaluates 
it as an element of the group $$G$$.

Zooming out, if we return to the general setting $$F \dashv G$$,
we always have $$\eta\colon 1_{\mathsf{C}} \Rightarrow GF$$
and $$\epsilon\colon FG \Rightarrow 1_{\mathsf{D}}$$,
and it turns out these natural transformations satisfy the following two identities
called the *triangle identities*

$$(\epsilon F) \cdot (F\eta) = 1_{F}\quad\text{and}\quad (G\epsilon)\cdot (\eta G) = 1_{G}.$$

For the free $$\dashv$$ forgetful adjunction,
the first identity says that if you take the map $$FX \to FUFX$$ defined 
on sets by sending $$X$$ to its image in $$UFX$$ and then extending to the free groups on these sets,
and then follow it with the map $$FUFX \to FX$$ that recognizes a word in $$UFX$$ as an element of $$FX$$,
you get the identity of the free group on $$X$$, which seems believable.
The second identity says that if you start with a group $$G$$,
the map $$UG \to UFUG$$ that sends an element $$g \in G$$ to that element thought of as a word in $$FUG$$,
and then apply the map $$UFUG \to UG$$ that is the underlying set map of the homomorphism $$FUG \to G$$
that recognizes a word in $$G$$ as an element of $$G$$, you get the identity of $$UG$$,
also believable.

Anyway, it turns out that for a pair of functors $$F\colon \mathsf{C} \to \mathsf{D}$$
and $$G\colon \mathsf{D} \to \mathsf{C}$$,
the existence of the natural transformations $$\eta\colon 1_{\mathsf{C}} \Rightarrow GF$$
and $$\epsilon\colon FG \Rightarrow 1_{\mathsf{D}}$$ satisfying the triangle identities
is equivalent to having an adjunction.

## Reflective and coreflective subcategories

The example of abelianization is an example of something the nLab delightfully called [-ification],
or did back in 2019.
The idea is we have a full subcategory $$\mathsf{Ab}$$ of $$\mathsf{Grp}$$
(every homomorphism of abelian groups qua groups is a homomorphism of abelian groups)
and the inclusion $$\iota$$ has a left adjoint.
The unit of the adjunction is a morphism in the larger category from an object to its "reflection" 
in the smaller category.

The dual notion, when the inclusion has a *right* adjoint,
is a *coreflective* subcategory.
An example of this, that I'd like to explain partially for myself,
is the inclusion of compactly generated spaces into all spaces.
A Hausdorff space $$Y$$ is *compactly generated,* in one formulation,
if it is the direct limit (or colimit, if you prefer) of all of its compact subspaces.
By the definition of the direct limit,
this says that a map $$Y \to X$$ is continuous if and only if 
its restriction to every compact (necessarily Hausdorff) subspace is continuous.
Since the image of a compact Hausdorff space $$K$$ in $$Y$$ is compact Hausdorff,
this is equivalent to saying the following.

> A map $$Y \to X$$ is continuous if and only if
for every map from a compact Hausdorff space $$K$$ to $$Y$$,
the composition $$K \to Y \to X$$ is continuous.

This latter statement is more appropriately the defintion of a compactly generated space if we don't assume
$$Y$$ to be Hausdorff.
We will, though, because I like Hausdorff spaces.

The category $$\mathsf{CGHaus}$$ is a full subcategory of $$\mathsf{Haus}$$,
the category of Hausdorff topological spaces and continuous functions.
In fact it is a coreflective subcategory:
the right adjoint of the inclusion $$\iota$$ is the functor $$k$$ which sends a space $$X$$
to $$kX$$, the direct limit of all of its compact subspaces.
Let's check that this is really a functor:
given a map $$f\colon X \to Y$$,
the restriction of $$f$$ to any subspace is continuous,
and the image of a compact subset of $$X$$ is a compact subset of $$Y$$,
so the restrictions $$f|_K$$ assemble into a map $$kf\colon kX \to kY$$.
It's not hard to check that this construction respects function composition
and sends the identity of $$X$$ to the identity of $$kX$$.
So we have $$\iota\colon \mathsf{CGHaus} \to \mathsf{Haus}$$ and $$k\colon\mathsf{Haus} \to \mathsf{CGHaus}$$.
The adjunction is the claim that we have

$$\mathsf{Haus}(\iota X,Y) \cong \mathsf{CGHaus}(X,kY).$$

In other words, there is a (natural) bijection between maps 
from a compactly generated Hausdorff space $$X$$ to a Hausdorff space $$Y$$
and maps from $$X$$ to $$kY$$.
This is true: 
given a map $$f\colon X \to Y$$ and a compact subset $$K$$ of $$X$$,
the restriction $$f|_K$$ has image a compact subspace of $$Y$$,
which we may continue into $$kY$$.
These maps glue up to give a map from the direct limit of all compact subspaces of $$X$$ to $$kY$$.
Since $$X$$ is compactly generated Hausdorff,
it is the direct limit of its compact subsets,
so what we have shown is that the map $$f$$ *factors through* the map $$\epsilon_Y\colon kY \to Y$$
defined by the universal property of the direct limit.
It is clear that this process is surjective,
and it is injective as well: if $$f \ne g$$, since $$X$$ is the direct limit of all of its compact subsets,
we can find a compact subspace on which $$f$$ and $$g$$ disagree,
so their images in $$kY$$ disagree, so the maps $$\tilde f \colon X \to kY$$ and $$\tilde g\colon X \to kY$$
disagree.

## RAPL

I want to finish out this blog post with one of the coolest applications of adjoint functors:
"Right Adjoints Preserve Limits" and dually "Left Adjoints Preserve Colimits".
What this says, supposing I have an adjoint pair $$F \dashv G$$
between $$\mathsf{C}$$ and $$\mathsf{D}$$,
is that $$\varprojlim_i Gd_i = G(\varprojlim_i d_i)$$
and $$\varinjlim_i Fc_i = F(\varinjlim_i c_i)$$.
So if I have a diagram whose limit I want to compute in $$\mathsf{C}$$ which comes from $$\mathsf{D}$$
via $$G$$,
I can compute its limit in $$\mathsf{D}$$ and then apply $$G$$, and I'll get what I want.

Let's bring it down to earth.
One thing this says is that the free product of two free groups $$FX$$ and $$FY$$
is the free group on their disjoint union $$FX * FY = F(X\amalg Y)$$.
Another thing this says is that the underlying set of the product of two groups $$G$$ and $$H$$
is the product of $$G$$ and $$H$$ as sets.

For compactly generated Hausdorff spaces,
this says that the product of $$kX$$ and $$kY$$ is $$k(X\times Y)$$,
but that (for instance) their disjoint union is already compactly generated Hausdorff.

[-ification]: https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/completion
