---
title: "Adjoints"
date: 2022-06-01T16:04:39-04:00
math: true
---
I realized I haven't, to my knowledge, talked about adjoint functors yet!
Let's do that now,
and introduce *compactly generated* topological spaces in the process.

## Adjoint functors

A pair of functors {{< katex >}}$F\colon \mathsf{C} \to \mathsf{D}${{< /katex >}} and {{< katex >}}$G\colon \mathsf{D} \to \mathsf{C}${{< /katex >}} 
are an *adjoint pair,*
or more accurately, {{< katex >}}$F${{< /katex >}} is *left adjoint* to {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}}
and {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}} is *right adjoint* to {{< katex >}}$F${{< /katex >}}, written {{< katex >}}$F \dashv G${{< /katex >}},
if there is an isomorphism

{{< katex >}}$ \mathsf{D}(Fc,d) \cong \mathsf{C}(c,Gd)${{< /katex >}}

natural in {{< katex >}}$c${{< /katex >}} and {{< katex >}}$d${{< /katex >}}.

For example, let {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{C}${{< /katex >}} be the category of sets {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{Set}${{< /katex >}}
and {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{D}${{< /katex >}} the category of groups {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{Grp}${{< /katex >}}.
Since every group is in particular a set,
and every homomorphism in particular a function,
we have a functor {{< katex >}}$U\colon \mathsf{Grp} \to \mathsf{Set}${{< /katex >}}.
On the other side we have a functor {{< katex >}}$F\colon \mathsf{Set} \to \mathsf{Grp}${{< /katex >}}
that sends a set {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} to the free group on that set {{< katex >}}$F(X)${{< /katex >}}.
The claimed isomorphism 

{{< katex >}}$ \mathsf{Grp}(FX,G) \cong \mathsf{Set}(X,UG)${{< /katex >}}

says that homomorphisms from the free group on a set {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} to a group {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}}
are in one-to-one correspondence with set maps from {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} to the set {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}}.
This is the universal property of the free group!
I can imagine it being a good idea to trace out what naturality is asserting here;
you should try it.

Another example is {{< katex >}}$\iota \dashv (\cdot)^{\operatorname{ab}}${{< /katex >}},
where {{< katex >}}$\iota\colon \mathsf{Ab} \to \mathsf{Grp}${{< /katex >}} is the inclusion
of the category of abelian groups into the category of groups
and {{< katex >}}$(\cdot)^{\operatorname{ab}}\colon \mathsf{Grp} \to \mathsf{Ab}${{< /katex >}}
sends a group to its *abelianization.*
Here the claimed isomorphism

{{< katex >}}$\mathsf{Ab}(G^{\operatorname{ab}},A) \cong \mathsf{Grp}(G,\iota A)${{< /katex >}}

says that homomorphisms from the abelianization of {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}} to an abelian group {{< katex >}}$A${{< /katex >}}
are in one-to-one correspondence with homomorphisms from {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}} to {{< katex >}}$A${{< /katex >}}.

It can be particularly illuminating to plug the same object 
into one side of the equation and see what happens to the identity on the other side.
A silly example is if we let {{< katex >}}$G = \iota A${{< /katex >}}.
On the lefthand side of the equation we have for every abelian group {{< katex >}}$A${{< /katex >}}
a special homomorphism {{< katex >}}$\epsilon_A \colon (\iota A)^{\operatorname{ab}} \to A${{< /katex >}};
this turns out to be the isomorphism identifying the abelianization of an abelian group {{< katex >}}$A${{< /katex >}} with itself.
This homomorphism, if you trace it out,
turns out to be natural in {{< katex >}}$A${{< /katex >}}; we call it the *counit* of the adjunction.
A less silly example is if we let {{< katex >}}$A = G^{\operatorname{ab}}${{< /katex >}}.
Then on the righthand side of the equation we have for every group {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}}
a special homomorphism {{< katex >}}$\eta_G \colon G \to \iota(G^{\operatorname{ab}})${{< /katex >}}.
This is the homomorphism from {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}} to its abelianization;
it turns out to be natural in {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}} and we call it the *unit* of the adjunction.

For our free group example, the unit sends a set {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} to its image inside {{< katex >}}$FX${{< /katex >}}
and the counit is the map from the free group on the underlying set of a group {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}}
to the group {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}} that takes a word generated by elements of the group {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}} and evaluates 
it as an element of the group {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}}.

Zooming out, if we return to the general setting {{< katex >}}$F \dashv G${{< /katex >}},
we always have {{< katex >}}$\eta\colon 1_{\mathsf{C}} \Rightarrow GF${{< /katex >}}
and {{< katex >}}$\epsilon\colon FG \Rightarrow 1_{\mathsf{D}}${{< /katex >}},
and it turns out these natural transformations satisfy the following two identities
called the *triangle identities*

{{< katex >}}$(\epsilon F) \cdot (F\eta) = 1_{F}\quad\text{and}\quad (G\epsilon)\cdot (\eta G) = 1_{G}.${{< /katex >}}

For the free {{< katex >}}$\dashv${{< /katex >}} forgetful adjunction,
the first identity says that if you take the map {{< katex >}}$FX \to FUFX${{< /katex >}} defined 
on sets by sending {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} to its image in {{< katex >}}$UFX${{< /katex >}} and then extending to the free groups on these sets,
and then follow it with the map {{< katex >}}$FUFX \to FX${{< /katex >}} that recognizes a word in {{< katex >}}$UFX${{< /katex >}} as an element of {{< katex >}}$FX${{< /katex >}},
you get the identity of the free group on {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}}, which seems believable.
The second identity says that if you start with a group {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}},
the map {{< katex >}}$UG \to UFUG${{< /katex >}} that sends an element {{< katex >}}$g \in G${{< /katex >}} to that element thought of as a word in {{< katex >}}$FUG${{< /katex >}},
and then apply the map {{< katex >}}$UFUG \to UG${{< /katex >}} that is the underlying set map of the homomorphism {{< katex >}}$FUG \to G${{< /katex >}}
that recognizes a word in {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}} as an element of {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}}, you get the identity of {{< katex >}}$UG${{< /katex >}},
also believable.

Anyway, it turns out that for a pair of functors {{< katex >}}$F\colon \mathsf{C} \to \mathsf{D}${{< /katex >}}
and {{< katex >}}$G\colon \mathsf{D} \to \mathsf{C}${{< /katex >}},
the existence of the natural transformations {{< katex >}}$\eta\colon 1_{\mathsf{C}} \Rightarrow GF${{< /katex >}}
and {{< katex >}}$\epsilon\colon FG \Rightarrow 1_{\mathsf{D}}${{< /katex >}} satisfying the triangle identities
is equivalent to having an adjunction.

## Reflective and coreflective subcategories

The example of abelianization is an example of something the nLab delightfully called [-ification],
or did back in 2019.
The idea is we have a full subcategory {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{Ab}${{< /katex >}} of {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{Grp}${{< /katex >}}
(every homomorphism of abelian groups qua groups is a homomorphism of abelian groups)
and the inclusion {{< katex >}}$\iota${{< /katex >}} has a left adjoint.
The unit of the adjunction is a morphism in the larger category from an object to its "reflection" 
in the smaller category.

The dual notion, when the inclusion has a *right* adjoint,
is a *coreflective* subcategory.
An example of this, that I'd like to explain partially for myself,
is the inclusion of compactly generated spaces into all spaces.
A Hausdorff space {{< katex >}}$Y${{< /katex >}} is *compactly generated,* in one formulation,
if it is the direct limit (or colimit, if you prefer) of all of its compact subspaces.
By the definition of the direct limit,
this says that a map {{< katex >}}$Y \to X${{< /katex >}} is continuous if and only if 
its restriction to every compact (necessarily Hausdorff) subspace is continuous.
Since the image of a compact Hausdorff space {{< katex >}}$K${{< /katex >}} in {{< katex >}}$Y${{< /katex >}} is compact Hausdorff,
this is equivalent to saying the following.

> A map {{< katex >}}$Y \to X${{< /katex >}} is continuous if and only if
for every map from a compact Hausdorff space {{< katex >}}$K${{< /katex >}} to {{< katex >}}$Y${{< /katex >}},
the composition {{< katex >}}$K \to Y \to X${{< /katex >}} is continuous.

This latter statement is more appropriately the defintion of a compactly generated space if we don't assume
{{< katex >}}$Y${{< /katex >}} to be Hausdorff.
We will, though, because I like Hausdorff spaces.

The category {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{CGHaus}${{< /katex >}} is a full subcategory of {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{Haus}${{< /katex >}},
the category of Hausdorff topological spaces and continuous functions.
In fact it is a coreflective subcategory:
the right adjoint of the inclusion {{< katex >}}$\iota${{< /katex >}} is the functor {{< katex >}}$k${{< /katex >}} which sends a space {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}}
to {{< katex >}}$kX${{< /katex >}}, the direct limit of all of its compact subspaces.
Let's check that this is really a functor:
given a map {{< katex >}}$f\colon X \to Y${{< /katex >}},
the restriction of {{< katex >}}$f${{< /katex >}} to any subspace is continuous,
and the image of a compact subset of {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} is a compact subset of {{< katex >}}$Y${{< /katex >}},
so the restrictions {{< katex >}}$f|_K${{< /katex >}} assemble into a map {{< katex >}}$kf\colon kX \to kY${{< /katex >}}.
It's not hard to check that this construction respects function composition
and sends the identity of {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} to the identity of {{< katex >}}$kX${{< /katex >}}.
So we have {{< katex >}}$\iota\colon \mathsf{CGHaus} \to \mathsf{Haus}${{< /katex >}} and {{< katex >}}$k\colon\mathsf{Haus} \to \mathsf{CGHaus}${{< /katex >}}.
The adjunction is the claim that we have

{{< katex >}}$\mathsf{Haus}(\iota X,Y) \cong \mathsf{CGHaus}(X,kY).${{< /katex >}}

In other words, there is a (natural) bijection between maps 
from a compactly generated Hausdorff space {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} to a Hausdorff space {{< katex >}}$Y${{< /katex >}}
and maps from {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} to {{< katex >}}$kY${{< /katex >}}.
This is true: 
given a map {{< katex >}}$f\colon X \to Y${{< /katex >}} and a compact subset {{< katex >}}$K${{< /katex >}} of {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}},
the restriction {{< katex >}}$f|_K${{< /katex >}} has image a compact subspace of {{< katex >}}$Y${{< /katex >}},
which we may continue into {{< katex >}}$kY${{< /katex >}}.
These maps glue up to give a map from the direct limit of all compact subspaces of {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} to {{< katex >}}$kY${{< /katex >}}.
Since {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} is compactly generated Hausdorff,
it is the direct limit of its compact subsets,
so what we have shown is that the map {{< katex >}}$f${{< /katex >}} *factors through* the map {{< katex >}}$\epsilon_Y\colon kY \to Y${{< /katex >}}
defined by the universal property of the direct limit.
It is clear that this process is surjective,
and it is injective as well: if {{< katex >}}$f \ne g${{< /katex >}}, since {{< katex >}}$X${{< /katex >}} is the direct limit of all of its compact subsets,
we can find a compact subspace on which {{< katex >}}$f${{< /katex >}} and {{< katex >}}$g${{< /katex >}} disagree,
so their images in {{< katex >}}$kY${{< /katex >}} disagree, so the maps {{< katex >}}$\tilde f \colon X \to kY${{< /katex >}} and {{< katex >}}$\tilde g\colon X \to kY${{< /katex >}}
disagree.

## RAPL

I want to finish out this blog post with one of the coolest applications of adjoint functors:
"Right Adjoints Preserve Limits" and dually "Left Adjoints Preserve Colimits".
What this says, supposing I have an adjoint pair {{< katex >}}$F \dashv G${{< /katex >}}
between {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{C}${{< /katex >}} and {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{D}${{< /katex >}},
is that {{< katex >}}$\varprojlim_i Gd_i = G(\varprojlim_i d_i)${{< /katex >}}
and {{< katex >}}$\varinjlim_i Fc_i = F(\varinjlim_i c_i)${{< /katex >}}.
So if I have a diagram whose limit I want to compute in {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{C}${{< /katex >}} which comes from {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{D}${{< /katex >}}
via {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}},
I can compute its limit in {{< katex >}}$\mathsf{D}${{< /katex >}} and then apply {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}}, and I'll get what I want.

Let's bring it down to earth.
One thing this says is that the free product of two free groups {{< katex >}}$FX${{< /katex >}} and {{< katex >}}$FY${{< /katex >}}
is the free group on their disjoint union {{< katex >}}$FX * FY = F(X\amalg Y)${{< /katex >}}.
Another thing this says is that the underlying set of the product of two groups {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}} and {{< katex >}}$H${{< /katex >}}
is the product of {{< katex >}}$G${{< /katex >}} and {{< katex >}}$H${{< /katex >}} as sets.

For compactly generated Hausdorff spaces,
this says that the product of {{< katex >}}$kX${{< /katex >}} and {{< katex >}}$kY${{< /katex >}} is {{< katex >}}$k(X\times Y)${{< /katex >}},
but that (for instance) their disjoint union is already compactly generated Hausdorff.

[-ification]: https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/completion
